The Thargoids are an intelligent, highly advanced insectoid species that have existed for millions of years. They are the only known extant spacefaring species in the Milky Way galaxy other than humanity. Thargoids are highly territorial and seemingly rebuff all diplomatic overtures with unmitigated hostility, but are also known to be extremely slow to adapt.

In the distant past, the Thargoids instigated a war with another sapient species called the Guardians over territory. Although the Guardians eventually prevailed, the Thargoids only opted to retreat because they were unprepared for a protracted campaign against a rival civilization.

The Thargoids and humanity were embroiled in two wars. The First Thargoid War (3125-3151) is believed to have ended in a human victory with the Intergalactic Naval Reserve Arm's successful deployment of the mycoid bio-weapon. The Second Thargoid War began in 3303 (Over 152 years later) and rapidly escalated, disrupting dozens of systems across the Pleiades Nebula, Witch Head Nebula, Coalsack Nebula, California Nebula and the Core Systems. Following the battle of HIP 22460, Azimuth Biotech deployed the Proteus Wave which failed to cripple the Thargoid species in August 3308. The Thargoids responded by mobilizing invasion fleets via 8 Maelstroms that converged on the human inhabited bubble. It culminated with the invasion of Sol by the 8th Titan Cocijo. The war caused billions of casualties. It concluded with a human victory after the destruction of Cocijo on 18 Dec 3310.

The First Thargoid War was an interstellar conflict between humanity, represented by the Galactic Cooperative (GalCop) and the Intergalactic Naval Reserve Arm (INRA), and the Thargoids that occurred in the first half of the 32nd century. It was humanity's first war with another intelligent, spacefaring species. Although few records of the war have survived, it is believed that it was sparked in 3125 by a human frontier colony's hostile reaction to an encounter with Thargoid vessels, but it is unclear whether the Thargoids were motivated to counterattack by revenge, conquest, or something else. Initially at a disadvantage against the technologically-superior Thargoids, humanity eventually triumphed due to INRA's development of the mycoid biological weapon, which proved devastatingly effective against both the Thargoids and their ships. Thargoid encounters ceased after 3151, and it was presumed that they had either disengaged from the war and retreated to their home systems in defeat, or even been rendered extinct. In subsequent decades, the First Thargoid War was forgotten, with many among the public coming to believe that the Thargoids had never existed outside of urban legends in the first place. The interwar period lasted until the Second Thargoid War in 3303.

The Second Thargoid War was an interstellar conflict between humanity, primarily represented by the multinational xenological research organization Aegis with a volunteer militia of independent pilots versus the Thargoids. It began 152 years after the First Thargoid War (3125 - 3151).

The hostilities are speculated to have arisen over a territorial and resource dispute centered on the Pleiades Nebula. This nebula was seeded with Thargoid Barnacles before human colonization efforts of the Pleiades started in 3301. No communication was established between both sides. While it is unclear which side struck first, the Thargoids attacked numerous human Starports, Settlements, and Ships throughout the Core Systems and adjacent regions with little or no provocation. Humanity was forced on the defensive against a technologically-superior foe with the ability to strike from anywhere. The war ended with a human victory on 18 Dec 3310.